{\rtf1\ansi\deff0
{\fonttbl{\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Segoe UI;}{\f1\fmodern\fcharset0 Consolas;}}
{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green102\blue204;\red80\green80\blue80;\red0\green128\blue0;\red139\green0\blue0;}
\viewkind4\uc1

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1
\f0\fs36\b\cf2 Every Tongue \endash  User Guide\b0\cf0\fs20\par

\fs24\b Overview\b0\fs20\par
Every Tongue is a Windows desktop application that generates subtitle files from audio and video sources. It wraps the whisper.cpp speech-to-text engine for batch processing and faster-whisper with Silero VAD for real-time live transcription, with optional AI-powered translation to 200+ languages via NLLB-200.\par

The application has six tabs: \b Live Translation\b0 , \b Subtitle Server\b0 , \b Main / Job\b0 , \b Paths & Tools\b0 , \b Settings\b0 , and \b Help\b0 .\par

\fs24\b\cf2 Live Translation Tab\b0\cf0\fs20\par
The Live Translation tab provides real-time speech-to-text transcription from your microphone or other audio input device. It uses faster-whisper with Silero VAD (Voice Activity Detection) to detect natural speech pauses and segment audio into complete utterances, producing cleaner and more accurate transcriptions than fixed-window chunking.\par

\b Controls\b0\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa100
\bullet\tab\b Audio Device\b0  \endash  Select your audio input device. Click \b Refresh\b0  to re-scan if you connect a new device.\par
\bullet\tab\b Input Language\b0  \endash  The language being spoken. Set to \b auto\b0  for automatic detection, or select a specific language for better accuracy. This can also be changed remotely from the phone admin panel while a session is running.\par
\bullet\tab\b Filters...\b0  \endash  Opens the Filter Editor to manage hallucination phrases, glossary corrections, and profanity filters (see Filter Editor section below).\par
\bullet\tab\b Start / Stop\b0  \endash  Begin or stop live transcription. On first use, the application downloads required dependencies (Python runtime, faster-whisper model, Python packages) if they are not already installed. The model stays loaded in memory between sessions for fast restart.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1
\b Tuning Sliders\b0\par
Two sliders on the button bar allow real-time tuning of transcription behaviour without restarting:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa100
\bullet\tab\b Max Segment\b0  (5\endash 60s) \endash  Maximum audio duration before forcing a commit. Shorter values produce more frequent, smaller subtitles. Longer values allow the VAD to accumulate longer utterances. Default: 15s.\par
\bullet\tab\b VAD Silence\b0  (200\endash 1500ms) \endash  How long a pause in speech before the VAD considers the utterance complete. Lower values make the system more responsive but may split sentences. Higher values wait longer for the speaker to continue. Default: 800ms.\par
\bullet\tab\b Tune\b0  \endash  Analyses session statistics (commit durations, silence gaps, word rates) and recommends optimal slider values based on the current speaker\rquote s pattern. Available after a session has been running for at least one minute.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1
\b Sub-tabs\b0\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa100
\bullet\tab\b Live Output\b0  \endash  An embedded web view showing the same subtitle page as the Subtitle Server. Displays live transcription text with the same styling and features as the web client. A \b Save Transcript\b0  button at the bottom saves committed text to a file.\par
\bullet\tab\b Log\b0  \endash  A scrolling text log showing transcription activity with colour coding. In-progress text is shown in white and continuously refined as you speak. Committed (finalised) text appears in green. Status messages appear in yellow and system information in grey. Use \b Save Log\b0  and \b Clear Log\b0  to manage the log.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1
\b Real-Time Translation\b0\par
When the Subtitle Server is running, connected web clients can select a translation language from the dropdown on the web page. The application uses an NLLB-200 translation server (a Python sidecar process) to translate transcribed text on-the-fly. Each client can choose their own language independently. Over 200 languages are supported. Clients that do not select a translation language receive the original transcription.\par

If commits arrive while the translation model is still loading, they are buffered and translated once the model becomes ready, so no text is lost during startup.\par

\b Quality Filters\b0\par
Three filter systems improve translation and transcription quality:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa100
\bullet\tab\b Hallucination Filter\b0  \endash  Blocks known phrases that whisper tends to hallucinate during silence (e.g. \ldblquote Thanks for watching\rdblquote , \ldblquote Subscribe to my channel\rdblquote ). Uses fuzzy matching at 80% similarity. Phrases are defined per language in \f1 hallucinations.json\f0 .\par
\bullet\tab\b Glossary\b0  \endash  Corrects systematic mistranslations. When source text contains a trigger word, specified wrong words in the translation output are replaced with correct ones. For example, Spanish \ldblquote culto\rdblquote  (church service) is corrected from \ldblquote cult\rdblquote  to \ldblquote service\rdblquote  in English. Defined in \f1 glossary.json\f0 .\par
\bullet\tab\b Profanity Filter\b0  \endash  Replaces profane words in translation output with [...]. NLLB sometimes hallucinates vulgar language that was not present in the source speech. Defined per target language in \f1 profanity.json\f0 .\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1
All three filter files can be edited through the \b Filter Editor\b0  (see below) and hot-reloaded without restarting the application.\par

\fs24\b\cf2 Filter Editor\b0\cf0\fs20\par
Opened via the \b Filters...\b0  button on the Live Translation tab. Provides a graphical interface to edit the three filter JSON files without manually editing JSON.\par

\b Hallucinations Tab\b0\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa100
\bullet\tab Select a language from the dropdown to view its hallucination phrases.\par
\bullet\tab Type a phrase in the text box and click \b Add\b0  to add it.\par
\bullet\tab Select a phrase and click \b Remove Selected\b0  to delete it.\par
\bullet\tab Click \b Add Language\b0  to create a new language section (use whisper language codes like en, es, ca).\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1
\b Profanity Filter Tab\b0\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa100
\bullet\tab Same interface as the Hallucinations tab, but for profanity words.\par
\bullet\tab Uses NLLB language codes (e.g. eng_Latn, spa_Latn) since the filter runs on translation output.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1
\b Glossary Tab\b0\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa100
\bullet\tab The top grid shows all glossary entries with their trigger word, source languages, and description.\par
\bullet\tab Select an entry to edit its details in the panel below.\par
\bullet\tab\b Trigger\b0  \endash  The substring to look for in the source text (case-insensitive).\par
\bullet\tab\b Source Langs\b0  \endash  Comma-separated NLLB codes for which source languages this entry applies to (e.g. spa_Latn, cat_Latn).\par
\bullet\tab\b Comment\b0  \endash  A human-readable description of why this entry exists.\par
\bullet\tab\b Fixes grid\b0  \endash  Each row maps a target language to a wrong/right word pair. When the trigger is detected in the source and the translation is to that target language, the wrong word is replaced with the right word.\par
\bullet\tab Use \b Add Entry / Remove Entry\b0  for the main list and \b Add Fix / Remove Fix\b0  for the corrections grid.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1
Click \b Save & Reload\b0  to write all changes to disk and tell the running servers to reload their filters immediately. No restart is needed.\par

\fs24\b\cf2 Subtitle Server Tab\b0\cf0\fs20\par
The Subtitle Server provides a web-based live caption overlay that can be viewed on any device (phone, tablet, second monitor) connected to the same network. It serves a web page that displays live transcription text via WebSocket. The server runs on HTTP and also starts an HTTPS listener on the next port (e.g. 5081) to support the screen wake lock feature on mobile devices.\par

\b Server Settings\b0\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa100
\bullet\tab\b Port\b0  \endash  The HTTP port the server listens on (default: 5080). HTTPS is automatically available on port+1.\par
\bullet\tab\b Start / Stop / Restart Server\b0  \endash  Control the subtitle server.\par
\bullet\tab\b Simulate\b0  \endash  Send sample text to test the display without a live audio source.\par
\bullet\tab\b Stop Sim\b0  \endash  Stop the simulation.\par
\bullet\tab\b Background / Text Color\b0  \endash  Customise the subtitle display colours. Click the colour swatch to open a colour picker.\par
\bullet\tab\b Font\b0  \endash  Choose the font family for subtitles displayed on the web page.\par
\bullet\tab\b Size\b0  \endash  Set the font size for subtitles.\par
\bullet\tab\b Bold\b0  \endash  Toggle bold text for subtitles.\par
\bullet\tab\b Setup Translation\b0  \endash  Download and install the NLLB-200 translation model and dependencies (~3.5 GB). This is required for the real-time translation feature. Once installed, translation is available automatically.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1
\b Connection Info\b0\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa100
\bullet\tab Shows the server status, URL, and number of connected clients.\par
\bullet\tab\b Copy URL\b0  \endash  Copies the server URL to the clipboard so you can share it with other devices.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1
\b Server Log\b0\par
Below the connection info, a log area shows server events including client connections, disconnections, language changes, and translation activity.\par

\b Web Page Features\b0\par
The subtitle web page includes a toolbar in the top-right corner with the following controls:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa100
\bullet\tab\b Remote Control\b0  (gear icon) \endash  Opens an admin panel to remotely Start, Stop, Restart, or Simulate the live transcription. Also includes an \b Input Language\b0  selector to change the transcription language without returning to the desktop application. A Clear button clears the subtitle display on the current device.\par
\bullet\tab\b Settings\b0  (Aa icon) \endash  Adjust font size, font family, bold, text colour, voice selection and speed for read-aloud, scroll direction, and tag display options. Preferences are saved locally in the browser.\par
\bullet\tab\b Translation\b0  \endash  Select a translation language. Each client can choose independently. Select \ldblquote Original\rdblquote  to receive the untranslated text.\par
\bullet\tab\b Tags\b0  \endash  Choose what information to show before each subtitle line: Off, Language, Time, or both.\par
\bullet\tab\b Read Aloud\b0  (speaker icon) \endash  Toggles text-to-speech. Each new subtitle line is read aloud using the browser\rquote s speech synthesis.\par
\bullet\tab\b Keep Screen On\b0  (light icon) \endash  Prevents the phone or tablet screen from dimming. Requires HTTPS (the secure port). On first use, a guided overlay explains how to accept the self-signed certificate (one-time setup).\par
\bullet\tab\b Save Transcript\b0  \endash  Download the current transcript as a text file.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1
\b Web Page Localisation\b0\par
The web interface automatically detects the browser\rquote s language and displays all labels, buttons, and messages in the matching language. Supported: English, Spanish, French, German, Catalan, Portuguese, Japanese, and Chinese.\par

\fs24\b\cf2 Main / Job Tab\b0\cf0\fs20\par
The Main / Job tab handles batch processing of audio and video files. It supports four modes:\par

\b Batch Processing Modes\b0\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa100
\bullet\tab\b YouTube -> Subtitles\b0  \endash  Download a YouTube video (or select a local video file), optionally trim to a time range, and generate subtitles.\par
\bullet\tab\b Audio File -> Subtitles\b0  \endash  Transcribe any audio file (OGG, MP3, WAV, FLAC, M4A, etc.) into subtitles.\par
\bullet\tab\b YouTube -> Full Video\b0  \endash  Download or copy a video and trim it, without transcription.\par
\bullet\tab\b YouTube -> Audio Only\b0  \endash  Download or copy a video, trim it, and extract the audio to a high-quality MP3 file.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1
\b Mode Selector\b0\par
Use the dropdown at the top to switch between modes. The interface adapts to show only the relevant controls for the selected mode.\par

\b Input Controls\b0\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa100
\bullet\tab\b URL / File\b0  \endash  Enter a YouTube URL or click Browse to select a local video or audio file.\par
\bullet\tab\b Input Language\b0  \endash  The language spoken in the audio. Set to \b auto\b0  for automatic detection, or select a specific language for better accuracy.\par
\bullet\tab\b Output Language\b0  \endash  The language for generated subtitles. Set to \b auto\b0  to keep the same language as input. Set to \b en\b0  to translate to English (Whisper can only translate \i to\i0  English).\par
\bullet\tab\b Model\b0  \endash  Choose which whisper model to use. Larger models are more accurate but slower.\par
\bullet\tab\b Start Time / End Time\b0  \endash  Optionally specify a time range (HH:MM:SS) to trim the video before transcribing.\par
\bullet\tab\b Output Directory\b0  \endash  Where all working files and the final output will be saved.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1
\b Output Formats\b0\par
Available for subtitle modes. Select which formats to generate:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa100
\bullet\tab\b SRT\b0  \endash  SubRip subtitle format (most common, enabled by default)\par
\bullet\tab\b VTT\b0  \endash  WebVTT format (for web use)\par
\bullet\tab\b TXT\b0  \endash  Plain text transcript\par
\bullet\tab\b JSON\b0  \endash  Structured JSON output\par
\bullet\tab\b CSV\b0  \endash  Comma-separated values\par
\bullet\tab\b LRC\b0  \endash  Lyrics format\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1
\b Progress\b0\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa100
\bullet\tab The top progress bar shows overall pipeline progress. A second bar appears during transcription for chunk-level progress.\par
\bullet\tab\b Start\b0  \endash  Begin processing.\par
\bullet\tab\b Resume\b0  \endash  Continue an interrupted job. Select the output folder and already completed chunks are automatically skipped.\par
\bullet\tab\b Cancel\b0  \endash  Stop the current job.\par
\bullet\tab\b Open Output Folder\b0  \endash  Opens the output directory in Windows Explorer.\par
\bullet\tab\b Subtitle Edit\b0  \endash  Opens the generated SRT file in Subtitle Edit for review.\par
\bullet\tab\b Open preview.srt\b0  \endash  Opens the SRT file with your default application.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1
\b Log\b0\par
A log area at the bottom of the tab shows real-time output from the processing pipeline. Each entry is timestamped and colour-coded: green for success, black for information, grey for debug output, and red for errors. The log auto-scrolls to show the latest output. Use \b Clear Log\b0  to reset and \b Copy to Clipboard\b0  to copy the entire log.\par

\fs24\b\cf2 Paths & Tools Tab\b0\cf0\fs20\par
Configure file paths to external tools and models:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa100
\bullet\tab\b whisper-cli.exe\b0  \endash  The whisper speech recognition engine (used by batch transcription modes).\par
\bullet\tab\b yt-dlp.exe\b0  \endash  YouTube video downloader.\par
\bullet\tab\b ffmpeg.exe\b0  \endash  Audio/video processing tool (trimming, conversion, chunking).\par
\bullet\tab\b ffprobe.exe\b0  \endash  Audio/video analysis tool (duration detection).\par
\bullet\tab\b YouTube Model (.bin)\b0  \endash  The whisper model file used for YouTube -> Subtitles mode.\par
\bullet\tab\b Audio File Model (.bin)\b0  \endash  The whisper model file used for Audio File -> Subtitles mode. Can be set to a different (e.g. smaller, faster) model.\par
\bullet\tab\b faster-whisper model (folder)\b0  \endash  The faster-whisper model directory used by Live Translation (default: faster-whisper-large-v3).\par
\bullet\tab\b NLLB translation model (folder)\b0  \endash  The NLLB-200 translation model directory (default: nllb-model).\par
\bullet\tab\b Default output root\b0  \endash  Base directory where timestamped output folders are created.\par
\bullet\tab\b yt-dlp format string\b0  \endash  Download format preference for yt-dlp (default: best MP4 video + M4A audio).\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1
Click \b Verify All Paths\b0  to check that all configured tools and files exist. Use the \b Download whisper models\b0  link to obtain model files from the Hugging Face repository.\par

\fs24\b\cf2 Settings Tab\b0\cf0\fs20\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa100
\bullet\tab\b UI Language\b0  \endash  Change the interface language. Available: English, Spanish, French, German, Catalan, Portuguese, Simplified Chinese, Japanese.\par
\bullet\tab\b Theme\b0  \endash  Choose System, Light, or Dark theme.\par
\bullet\tab\b Start with Windows\b0  \endash  Launch Every Tongue automatically when you sign in to Windows.\par
\bullet\tab\b Reset All Settings\b0  \endash  Restore all configuration to factory defaults.\par
\bullet\tab\b Check for Tool Updates\b0  \endash  Check if newer versions of yt-dlp, ffmpeg, or other tools are available and download them.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1
\fs24\b\cf2 First Run Setup\b0\cf0\fs20\par
On first launch, the application checks for required tools and dependencies. If any are missing, you are prompted to download them automatically. This includes:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa100
\bullet\tab Core tools: whisper-cli, yt-dlp, ffmpeg, ffprobe, and the whisper model file.\par
\bullet\tab Python runtime: A portable Python installation used by the live transcription and translation servers.\par
\bullet\tab Python packages: Libraries required by faster-whisper and NLLB (installed via pip).\par
\bullet\tab faster-whisper model: The speech recognition model for Live Translation (~3 GB).\par
\bullet\tab NLLB-200 model: The translation model (~2.6 GB), downloaded when translation is first set up.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1
All dependencies are self-contained within the application folder and do not affect your system Python installation.\par

\fs24\b\cf2 Processing Pipeline\b0\cf0\fs20\par

\b YouTube -> Subtitles (8 steps):\b0\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa100
0.\tab Validate inputs and tool paths\par
1.\tab Download video using yt-dlp (or copy local file)\par
2.\tab Trim video to specified time range using ffmpeg\par
3.\tab Extract audio to WAV format (16kHz mono)\par
4.\tab Detect audio duration using ffprobe\par
5.\tab Split audio into chunks for parallel processing\par
6.\tab Transcribe all chunks in parallel using whisper-cli\par
7.\tab Merge chunk SRT files into final subtitle file with corrected timestamps\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1
\b Audio File -> Subtitles (6 steps):\b0\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa100
0.\tab Validate inputs and tool paths\par
1.\tab Convert audio to WAV format (16kHz mono)\par
2.\tab Detect audio duration\par
3.\tab Split audio into chunks\par
4.\tab Transcribe all chunks in parallel\par
5.\tab Merge into final SRT file\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1
\b YouTube -> Full Video (3 steps):\b0\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa100
0.\tab Validate inputs and tool paths\par
1.\tab Download video (or copy local file)\par
2.\tab Trim video (output: preview.mp4)\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1
\b YouTube -> Audio Only (4 steps):\b0\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa100
0.\tab Validate inputs and tool paths\par
1.\tab Download video (or copy local file)\par
2.\tab Trim video\par
3.\tab Extract audio to MP3 (output: yt_audio.mp3)\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1
\fs24\b\cf2 Debug Logging\b0\cf0\fs20\par
A detailed pipeline debug log is written to the application directory as \f1 YYYYMMDD_pipeline-debug.log\f0 . This log records every transcription commit, translation request, glossary/profanity filter action, timing data, and session statistics. Each session is marked with a header including the application version. Both the live-server and NLLB translation server write to the same log file with [LIVE] and [NLLB] prefixes respectively. This log is invaluable for diagnosing translation quality issues, missed utterances, or performance problems.\par

\fs24\b\cf2 Tips\b0\cf0\fs20\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa100
\bullet\tab For best subtitle quality, use the \b ggml-large-v3\b0  model. For quick results on short audio, use \b ggml-tiny\b0  or \b ggml-base\b0 .\par
\bullet\tab Use \b Resume\b0  to continue an interrupted job without re-downloading or re-processing completed chunks.\par
\bullet\tab Set \b Output Language\b0  to \b en\b0  to translate foreign-language audio directly into English subtitles.\par
\bullet\tab For Live Translation, a CUDA-capable GPU with at least 4 GB VRAM is recommended. The faster-whisper model uses ~1.5 GB and the NLLB translation model uses ~2.6 GB.\par
\bullet\tab The web subtitle page works on any device with a browser on the same network. Share the URL shown in the Connection Info section.\par
\bullet\tab To keep your phone screen on while viewing subtitles, use the Keep Screen On button on the web page (requires HTTPS).\par
\bullet\tab Use the \b Tune\b0  button after a minute of transcription to get recommended slider values tailored to the current speaker.\par
\bullet\tab If translations seem wrong for specific words, add a glossary entry via the \b Filter Editor\b0  \endash  changes take effect immediately after saving.\par
\bullet\tab The phone admin panel allows remote control of Start/Stop and language changes, useful when the desktop is not easily accessible.\par
\bullet\tab The help file automatically loads in your selected UI language if available.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1
\fs24\b\cf2 Required External Tools\b0\cf0\fs20\par
The following tools are required and can be downloaded automatically from the Settings tab:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa100
\bullet\tab\b whisper-cli\b0  \endash  Speech recognition engine (whisper.cpp) for batch transcription\par
\bullet\tab\b yt-dlp\b0  \endash  YouTube downloader (required for YouTube-based modes)\par
\bullet\tab\b ffmpeg\b0  \endash  Audio/video processing (required for all modes)\par
\bullet\tab\b ffprobe\b0  \endash  Media analysis, included with ffmpeg\par
\bullet\tab\b Subtitle Edit\b0  (optional) \endash  For reviewing and editing generated subtitle files\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1
\b Automatically Managed Dependencies\b0\par
The following are downloaded automatically on first use:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa100
\bullet\tab\b Python (embedded)\b0  \endash  A portable Python runtime used by the live transcription and translation servers.\par
\bullet\tab\b faster-whisper model\b0  \endash  The faster-whisper large-v3 speech recognition model (~3 GB).\par
\bullet\tab\b NLLB-200 model\b0  \endash  The Meta NLLB-200 1.3B translation model (~2.6 GB).\par
\bullet\tab\b Python packages\b0  \endash  faster-whisper, sounddevice, ctranslate2, sentencepiece, FastAPI, uvicorn, and other libraries.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1
\par
}